
Gravity | Definition, Physics, & Facts | Britannica Search Britannica Click here to search Browse Dictionary Quizzes Money Video Subscribe Subscribe Login Entertainment & Pop Culture Geography & Travel Health & Medicine Lifestyles & Social Issues Literature Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government Science Sports & Recreation Technology Visual Arts World History On This Day in History Quizzes Podcasts Dictionary Biographies Summaries Top Questions Week In Review Infographics Demystified Lists #WTFact Companions Image Galleries Spotlight The Forum One Good Fact Entertainment & Pop Culture Geography & Travel Health & Medicine Lifestyles & Social Issues Literature Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government Science Sports & Recreation Technology Visual Arts World History Britannica ExplainsIn these videos, Britannica explains a variety of topics and answers frequently asked questions.
Britannica ClassicsCheck out these retro videos from Encyclopedia Britannica’s archives.
#WTFact VideosIn #WTFact Britannica shares some of the most bizarre facts we can find.
This Time in HistoryIn these videos, find out what happened this month (or any month!) in history.
Demystified VideosIn Demystified, Britannica has all the answers to your burning questions.
Student PortalBritannica is the ultimate student resource for key school subjects like history, government, literature, and more.
COVID-19 PortalWhile this global health crisis continues to evolve, it can be useful to look to past pandemics to better understand how to respond today.
100 WomenBritannica celebrates the centennial of the Nineteenth Amendment, highlighting suffragists and history-making politicians.
Britannica BeyondWe’ve created a new place where questions are at the center of learning.
Go ahead. Ask. We won’t mind.
Saving EarthBritannica Presents Earth’s To-Do List for the 21st Century.
Learn about the major environmental problems facing our planet and what can be done about them! SpaceNext50Britannica presents SpaceNext50, From the race to the Moon to space stewardship, we explore a wide range of subjects that feed our curiosity about space! gravity Table of Contents gravity Table of Contents IntroductionDevelopment of gravitational theoryEarly conceptsNewton’s law of gravityWeight and massInteraction between celestial bodiesPotential theoryEffects of local mass differencesWeighing the EarthAcceleration around Earth, the Moon, and other planetsVariations in gChanges due to locationChanges with timeMeasurements of gUnit of gravityAbsolute measurementsRelative measurementsGravimetric surveys and geophysicsThe Moon and the planetsGravitational theory and other aspects of physical theoryField theories of gravitationGravitational fields and the theory of general relativityThe paths of particles and lightGravitational radiationSome astronomical aspects of gravitationExperimental study of gravitationThe inverse square lawThe principle of equivalenceThe constant of gravitationThe variation of the constant of gravitation with timeFundamental character of G Fast Facts gravity summary Facts & Related Content Quizzes Physics and Natural Law All About Physics Quiz Media Videos Images More More Articles On This Topic Additional Reading Contributors Article History Home Science Astronomy gravity physics Actions Cite verifiedCite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook Twitter URL https://www.
britannica.
com/science/gravity-physics Give Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login).
Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
External Websites Physics LibreTexts - Discovering Gravity LiveScience - What is Gravity? Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students.
gravity - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) gravity - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Print print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite verifiedCite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Select Citation Style MLA APA Chicago Manual of Style Copy Citation Share Share Share to social media Facebook Twitter URL https://www.
britannica.
com/science/gravity-physics Feedback External Websites Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login).
Feedback Type Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
External Websites Physics LibreTexts - Discovering Gravity LiveScience - What is Gravity? Britannica Websites Articles from Britannica Encyclopedias for elementary and high school students.
gravity - Children's Encyclopedia (Ages 8-11) gravity - Student Encyclopedia (Ages 11 and up) Alternate titles: g-force, gravitation Written by Kenneth L.
Nordtvedt Emeritus Professor of Physics, Montana State University, Bozeman.
Kenneth L. Nordtvedt, Alan H.
Cook Master of Selwyn College, University of Cambridge, 1983–93; Jacksonian Professor of Natural Philosophy, University of Cambridge, 1972–90.
Author of The Interiors of the Planets and others. Alan H. Cook, James E.
Faller Fellow, Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics, University of Colorado, Boulder.
James E.
FallerSee All Fact-checked by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree.
They write new content and verify and edit content received from contributors.
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica Last Updated: Article History Table of Contents gravitational lens See all media Key People: Kip Thorne Isaac Newton Galileo John Archibald Wheeler Simon Stevin .
..
(Show more) Related Topics: Lagrange point supergravity weight Schwarzschild radius gravity anomaly .
..
(Show more) See all related content → Summary Read a brief summary of this topic gravity, also called gravitation, in mechanics, the universal force of attraction acting between all matter.
It is by far the weakest known force in nature and thus plays no role in determining the internal properties of everyday matter.
On the other hand, through its long reach and universal action, it controls the trajectories of bodies in the solar system and elsewhere in the universe and the structures and evolution of stars, galaxies, and the whole cosmos.
On Earth all bodies have a weight, or downward force of gravity, proportional to their mass, which Earth’s mass exerts on them.
Gravity is measured by the acceleration that it gives to freely falling objects.
At Earth’s surface the acceleration of gravity is about 9.
8 metres (32 feet) per second per second.
Thus, for every second an object is in free fall, its speed increases by about 9.
8 metres per second.
At the surface of the Moon the acceleration of a freely falling body is about 1.
6 metres per second per second.
Understand the concept of gravitational force using Newton's theory of gravitationSee all videos for this articleThe works of Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein dominate the development of gravitational theory.
Newton’s classical theory of gravitational force held sway from his Principia, published in 1687, until Einstein’s work in the early 20th century.
Newton’s theory is sufficient even today for all but the most precise applications.
Einstein’s theory of general relativity predicts only minute quantitative differences from the Newtonian theory except in a few special cases.
The major significance of Einstein’s theory is its radical conceptual departure from classical theory and its implications for further growth in physical thought.
The launch of space vehicles and developments of research from them have led to great improvements in measurements of gravity around Earth, other planets, and the Moon and in experiments on the nature of gravitation.
Development of gravitational theory Early concepts Newton argued that the movements of celestial bodies and the free fall of objects on Earth are determined by the same force.
The classical Greek philosophers, on the other hand, did not consider the celestial bodies to be affected by gravity, because the bodies were observed to follow perpetually repeating nondescending trajectories in the sky.
Thus, Aristotle considered that each heavenly body followed a particular “natural” motion, unaffected by external causes or agents.
Aristotle also believed that massive earthly objects possess a natural tendency to move toward Earth’s centre.
Those Aristotelian concepts prevailed for centuries along with two others: that a body moving at constant speed requires a continuous force acting on it and that force must be applied by contact rather than interaction at a distance.
These ideas were generally held until the 16th and early 17th centuries, thereby impeding an understanding of the true principles of motion and precluding the development of ideas about universal gravitation.
This impasse began to change with several scientific contributions to the problem of earthly and celestial motion, which in turn set the stage for Newton’s later gravitational theory.
Britannica Quiz Physics and Natural Law The 17th-century German astronomer Johannes Kepler accepted the argument of Nicolaus Copernicus (which goes back to Aristarchus of Samos) that the planets orbit the Sun, not Earth.
Using the improved measurements of planetary movements made by the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe during the 16th century, Kepler described the planetary orbits with simple geometric and arithmetic relations.
Kepler’s three quantitative laws of planetary motion are: The planets describe elliptic orbits, of which the Sun occupies one focus (a focus is one of two points inside an ellipse; any ray coming from one of them bounces off a side of the ellipse and goes through the other focus).
The line joining a planet to the Sun sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
The square of the period of revolution of a planet is proportional to the cube of its average distance from the Sun.
During this same period the Italian astronomer and natural philosopher Galileo Galilei made progress in understanding “natural” motion and simple accelerated motion for earthly objects.
He realized that bodies that are uninfluenced by forces continue indefinitely to move and that force is necessary to change motion, not to maintain constant motion.
In studying how objects fall toward Earth, Galileo discovered that the motion is one of constant acceleration.
He demonstrated that the distance a falling body travels from rest in this way varies as the square of the time.
As noted above, the acceleration due to gravity at the surface of Earth is about 9.
8 metres per second per second.
Galileo was also the first to show by experiment that bodies fall with the same acceleration whatever their composition (the weak principle of equivalence).
Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
Subscribe Now.
